- Everyone out there in the live stream, welcome, welcome.
Thank you for joining us.
It's really great to have you here.
So if you've got thoughts, comments you'd like to add
to the show, please put them into the YouTube live chat
and we'll see what we can do to make that part of the show.
All right, Julian, you ready to kick this off?
- Yeah, sure.
- Julian, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thank you.
- Yeah, it's great to have you here.
And I think we've got a bunch of fun stuff to talk about.
It's really interesting to think about
how we go about building software at scale.
And one of the things that just,
I don't know how you feel about it, reading your book,
I feel like you must have some opinions on this.
But when I go to a website
that is clearly not a small little company,
it's obviously a large company with money to put behind,
you know, professional developers and stuff.
And you click on it and it takes four seconds
for every page load.
It's just like, how is it possible
that you're building this software with so much,
oh, this is the face of your business.
And sometimes they decide to fix it
with front-end frameworks.
So then you get like a quick splash
of like a box with a little UI,
and then it's just loading for four seconds,
which to me feels no better.
So I don't know, I feel like building scalable software
is really important, and still people are getting it
quite wrong quite often.
- Yeah, I mean, I think it's also,
Because there's a lot of things what you want to do when you do that,
which is like, well, I mean, write proper code for sure,
but also you want to be able to measure everything,
like to understand where the bottleneck might be.
And that's not the easy part, like writing code and fixing bugs and stuff.
We all know how to do that. But then if we are asking you to optimize,
that's one of the things that I usually use as an example
when I talk about profiling is like, well, if I were to ask you to more like,
I want you to tell me which part of your code
is using 20% of the CPU.
You really don't know.
You can guess.
You can probably do a good guess most of the time,
but for real, you don't know.
You have no clue until you actually look at the data,
use a profiler or any tool for that being
that will give you this information.
- Yeah, we're really bad in using our intuition
for those things.
I remember the most extreme example I ever had of this
was I was working on this project
that was doing huge amounts of math, wavelet decomposition,
kind of like Fourier analysis, but I think kind of worse.
And I thought, okay, this is too slow.
It must be in all this complicated math area.
And I don't understand the math very well,
and I don't want to change it,
but this is gotta be here, right?
It's slow.
And I put it into the profiler.
And the thing that turned out was
we were spending 80% of our time
just doing like finding the index of an element in a list.
- Yeah, which is--
- It's insane.
- Yeah, my favorite, I think, programming quote
is from Donald Knuth, which is,
"Early optimization is the root of all evil."
Like, it's widely known, but I mean,
I think I will quote it every week or so now.
- Yeah, it's fantastic, it's fantastic.
Yeah, in my case, we switched it to a dictionary
and it went five times faster, and that was it.
Like, it was incredibly easy to fix,
but understanding that that was where the problem was,
I would have never guessed.
So yeah, it's hard to understand
and we're gonna talk about finding these challenges
and also some of the design patterns.
You've written a really cool book
called "The Hacker's Guide to Scaling Python"
and we're gonna dive into some of the ideas you cover there.
Also talk about some of your work at Datadog
that where you're doing some of the profiling stuff,
not necessarily for you internally,
although I'm sure there is some,
but it also could be for so many people
like you guys basically have profiling as a service
and runtime as a service,
runtime analysis of the service, which is great,
and we'll get into that.
But before we do, let's start with your story.
How'd you get into programming in Python?
- That was a good question.
So actually, I think I started like 15 years ago or so.
I actually started to learn Perl,
the first programming language,
like, you know, kind of scripting language,
like we used to call them at least a few years ago.
And yeah, I mean, I like Perl,
but I wanted to learn like object-oriented programming,
and I never understood Perl object-oriented programming.
Their model was so weird for me.
Maybe because I was young and I don't know.
But somebody talked to me about Python.
I bought the book, the RE book about Python.
And I kept it around for a year or so because I had no project at all,
no idea. Most of my job back then was to be a sysadmin,
so not really anything to do with Python.
And some day I was working on DPM,
like the line distribution,
and I was like, oh, I need to do something like a new project
and I'm going to do that with Python.
And I started to learn Python this way
with my project on one side, the book on the other side.
I was like, that's amazing, I love it.
And I never stopped doing Python after that.
- That's fantastic.
It feels like it very much was a
automate the boring stuff type of introduction.
Like there's these little problems
and Bash is too small or too hard to make it solve those problems.
What else could I use? And Python was a good fit for that.
- Yeah, it's a great way. I have a lot of people coming to me over the years
and being like, "Julien, I want you to contribute to a project.
I want to start something in Python. What should I do?" I don't know. What's your problem you want to solve?
If you want to find a boring thing you want to automate or anything that's the best
idea you can have to... If it's an open source project that exists already,
I mean, good for you, it's even better,
but I mean, just write a script or whatever you want to,
to start hacking and learning.
That's the best ways to scratch your own itch.
- Yeah, absolutely.
It's so easy to think of,
well, I want to build this great big thing,
but we all have these little problems that need solving
and it's good to start small and practice small
and build up and yeah, I find it really valuable.
People often ask me like, oh, I want to get started.
What should I do?
Should I build a website like this?
Maybe a machine learning thing like that.
I'm like, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Like that's, yes, you definitely want to get there.
But you know, if you're really, really just starting,
like, you know, don't kill yourself
by trying to take on too much at once.
So it sounds like it worked well for you.
How about now?
What are you doing day to day?
I hinted at Datadog.
- Yeah, so I've been doing Python for,
I mean, the next 10 years,
after I learned Python, I've been working on OpenStack,
which is a huge Python project,
implementing a open cloud system
where you can host your own AWS, basically.
And so everything is in Python there.
So I work on one of the largest Python projects,
which is up on the stack for a few years.
And then I decided to go for a change.
And then I was looking into building a profiling team,
building a profiler, a continuous profiler,
which means you would not profile your script on your laptop,
to profile your application running on your production system for real.
And I was like, "That's not something I think anyone did before in Python, at least.
So I want to do that." And that's what I started to do two years ago.
That's really interesting because normally,
you have this quantum mechanics problem with profilers and debuggers,
especially profilers like the line-by-line ones so much
where it runs at one speed normally,
and then you hit it with CProfile or something,
and it's five times slower or whatever it turns out to be.
And you're like, whoa, this is a lot slower.
Hopefully it gives you just a factor of slowness over it.
Like if it says it spends 20% here and 40% there,
hopefully it's still true at normal speed,
but sometimes it really depends, right?
Like if you're calling a function
that goes out of your system and that's 20%,
and then you're doing a really tight loop with lots of code,
the profiler will introduce more overhead
in your tight loop part than it will in the external system
where it adds basically zero overhead.
And so that's a big challenge of understanding profiling
results in general, and it's a really big reason
to not just run the profiler constantly in production.
- Yeah, exactly.
It's, I mean, and people do that now.
I mean, if you have the right profiler,
The way CProfile works, and we can dig a bit into that,
but CProfile, the way it works, it's going to intercept everything.
It's what we call a data mystic profiler,
where if you run the same program twice,
you will get the same CProfile output for sure.
It's intercepting all the function calls that you have.
So if you have a ton of function calls,
it makes things, like you were saying,
five times slower for sure at least.
And it'll inject a little bit of bytecode
at the beginning and end of every function,
all sorts of stuff, and it actually changes what happens.
Yeah, exactly. So it can change the timing.
So it's a good solution to have a
blackboard estimate of what's going on
and it gives you pretty good results.
Usually it's a good tool. I used it a lot of times over the years.
It always gave me good information.
The problem with C++ is that you can't use it in production
because it's too slow.
It's also not providing information.
It gives you the world time that you use,
but not necessarily the CPU time of each of your thread,
et cetera, that you're going to use.
So the information is not really fine-grained.
It's a rough--
- Yeah, it's probably not streaming either, right?
It runs and then gives you the answer,
not some sort of real-time stream of what's happening.
- So for one of the case, like we were mentioning previously,
where you know this part of the code,
like this scenario that you can recreate
in a one-minute script or something,
it's slow and it should take only 30 seconds,
seconds, you can run CProfiler on it, on one minute on your laptop and be okay,
I'm going to show you this piece of code. Then if you want to see what's
happening on prediction with a real workload for real,
and like you were saying, streaming the data to see
in real time what's going on, well CProfiler doesn't fit.
And also, any data mystic profiler which tries to catch
everything your program does will not work with good performance. So you have
to do another approach, which is what most profiling profilers
for continuous profiling, which is statistical profiling,
where you actually sample your program
and you try to look what it does most of the time
and the most of them.
So it's not a true representation.
It's not like the reality 100%.
It's a good statistical approach
of what your program is doing most of the time.
- I see, is that more of the sampling style of profilers
where it's like every 200 milliseconds,
like what are you doing now?
What are you doing now?
It's like a really annoying young child,
"What are you doing now? What are you doing now?"
And it's going to miss some things.
If there's a function you call and it's really quick,
it's like, "Well, you never called that function as far as the
profiler is concerned because it just didn't line up."
But if you do it enough over time,
you'll get to see a good picture of...
You don't care about the stuff that happens really fast,
but you care about the stuff that happens really slow,
and those are going to show up pretty largely
in these sorts of... - Exactly.
So if you use cProfile, you will see this very small
function call because it catches everything.
But in reality, for the purpose of optimizing your program,
you actually don't care. You don't care if you don't see them statistically,
because they're not important. So that's not what you want to optimize.
In the end, that's not where your problem lies, probably.
It's in the outliers, the ones that you see often in your profile,
the ones you see 80% of the time when the profiler asks your program,
"What are you doing?" It's always the same function being called,
"What's the one you want to look at?"
So I think that fits quite well with the production style.
I know I was gonna ask you about your book,
but we're sort of down in this profiling story.
- That's fine.
- And you know, I've used Datadog's tools
for error handling and like exception,
you know, let me know when there's an error type thing.
So I have that set up on like Talk Python,
the podcast site and the Talk Python Training courses site.
And of course, when you turn it on,
you get all these errors that are like happening
in the site, but nobody's complained to you
that you didn't realize, there's some edge case or whatever.
And it's really fantastic.
But something I've never looked at
is the real-time profiling stuff that you're
working on these days.
So maybe just--
I have no idea what this is like.
I can imagine maybe what it's like.
But give me a sense of what kind of stuff do I get out of it.
>>Nicolas: Sure.
Yeah.
So what you'll get, the first thing you'll get,
it's to profile.
So you'll get frame charts, essentially,
which are these kind of charts where you--
I mean, they look like flames, usually because they are orange and red,
and going up and down, and the height being the depth
of your stack trace, and the width being the percent of time
of resources that you use. So usually, it's time you're going to meter.
For example, we meter a wall time in CPU Jam.
So what you'll see is if your function is using a lot of wall time,
is it waiting for something? Is it waiting for a socket to be read,
for a lock to be acquired.
But one of the other profiles we gather is
how much CPU it's actually using.
If you want to know if your program is CPU-bound,
you will see which function is actually using the most CPU
in your program.
I could go to my hosting provider, and I could check the box
and say, "No, I don't want to pay $20 a month.
I want to pay $50 a month to make this go
two and a half times faster."
If I'm CPU-bound, that might actually work.
But if I'm not, it probably has no effect.
- Exactly. - For small effects, right?
So knowing that answer, knowing that would be really helpful.
Can I scale this vertically?
Or do I have to change something else?
Yeah?
Yeah, it's a whole story around profiling where, I mean,
most of our users, when they come to us,
like, we save thousands of dollars
because we actually understood that we got the button,
like, here or there, and we were able to downsize
our deployment because we optimized this function,
and we understood that this was blocked by this I/O, whatever.
and when you understand all of that with profiling,
whatever the language is, by the way,
being Python or Java or anything,
you actually save a lot.
We have a terrific story about customers or internal users
saving thousands of dollars just because
they were able to understand what was going on in their program.
And scaling up was not the solution,
optimizing the right function was the solution.
So you'll get CPU wall jam, and we also do memory profiling.
So you'll see all the memory allocations that are done by Python,
which are tied to the CPU usage
because the more objects you're going to allocate...
When I mean allocate, even if they don't stay around,
instead you want to create a new string, a new object,
even for a few seconds, milliseconds, it costs you memory.
You have to call malloc, and you have to allocate memory,
which takes time, so you will see that.
If you use a lot of objects that are not reused, for example,
you might want to see that.
The latest one we shipped a few weeks ago,
the eProfiler where you actually see a sample of your heap,
like the memory you use in real time
and what has been allocated on the heap.
- Can you tell me what,
how many of each type of object I have?
Like you've got 20 megs in list,
you've got 10 megs in strings, okay.
- No, I mean, in theory, yes.
In practice, no, and I'm actually fighting upstream
with the CPython products to be able to do that.
It's a limitation of CPython right now, technically.
I can't really do that, but I'm able to give you
the line number of the file, the function name,
and the thread that has allocated the memory.
And I wish I could know the class name,
that would be amazing, like, for Java as that,
and I want to have that in Python, so that will be my battle for next year.
But if you have a memory leak, for example,
which is quite common, where you keep adding more objects
on top of each other, at some point, your memory grows forever,
and you don't know where that comes from.
With such a tool, a heap profiler,
you're able to see which stack trace
is going to add more and more and more memory forever
and you'll be able to...
No, it won't give you the solution to your problem.
It will give you where to look at, which usually is--
- It's still pretty good, yeah.
- Yeah, it's like 90% of the problem, so yeah.
- So can you talk a little bit about the internals
of like how this works?
I'm guessing it's not using cProfile.
- No.
Is it using other open source things to sort of put the service together
or is it all custom stuff you did?
- No, it's custom stuff. Everything is open source, so we want you to look at it.
It's on our DigiTrace repository on GitHub.
So the way it works for the CPU and wartime profiler, it's pretty easy.
A lot of people know about that. You can actually ask CPython
to give you the list of running threads.
So if you do that 100 times per second, you get the list of running threads
and you can get the stack trace running,
like the function name, number of that running.
So if you do that a lot of time,
you get a pretty good picture of what your program
and threads are doing most of the time.
So, in summary, that's how it works.
It's pretty easy, then there's a few tricks
to get the CPU time, etc., using the Pthread API,
but that's most of it.
And for memory, there are actually a good thing
that has been done by a friend,
Victor Stiner, which is one of the--
He's done a great amount of performance improvement,
like really important stuff.
And one of the things he did in Python 3.4,
so it was a long time ago, is to add this module trace malloc,
which we don't use.
I actually built on top of it at some point,
but we don't use it anymore.
We wrote a lightweight version of it,
but it opened the memory API of CPython,
where we can actually plug your own memory allocator to CPython.
And that's what we do with our profiler.
We replace a memory allocator bar,
a tiny wrapper that catches every location
and then do profiling on top of it.
- Right, exactly.
So when it says allocate this,
you say record this was allocated and then allocate it.
Right? Something like that.
Is this the thing you were talking about on the screen?
This dd_trace_py?
- Yeah, exactly.
You have a dd_trace directory
inside of the profiling directory
and all the code is there.
So you can take a look at how it works internally.
Yeah, I mean, the way we build it is to be able to be easy to ship, to deploy,
you don't require any extra permission.
There are a lot of different ways of doing profiling using,
for example, Linux capabilities, Perf, a lot of things that are external
and not necessarily portable outside Linux.
But the problem is that most of the time they require extra permission,
like being root or anything, like using the PTRS API
requires you extra permission, which is great.
I mean, that's a great solution,
maybe better technically for some point
compared to what we do there,
but they are very complicated to deploy.
So that was another thing that drive us,
I think, for writing this.
- Right, so a simple pip install,
plug in a line or two and off you go, right?
I mean, the setup is pretty simple.
And so for exporting the data, we use a Pprof format from Google, which is pretty standard.
So you can actually use this profiler if you want.
Even if you're not a Datapack customer and you want to give it a try, you can actually
export the data to Pprof file and see what the data.
You won't have the whole analytics that we provide and the fancy flame shaft with all
their rainbow colors, but you can use a P-Prof Go tool,
which is pretty okay.
- Oh, interesting.
So you can get basically the raw data out of it
just by using it directly.
It's just you guys provide the nice gathering.
- Yeah, exactly.
We provide the streamlining to our backend
and we provide turn-off analysis.
But if you are curious and want to take a look
at how it works and what you can provide,
I mean, it's a good way to do it too.
- All right, awesome.
I do want to dig into your scaling book,
which is what we're going to spend a lot of time on.
One final question though, can I diff profiles
like from one version to another?
Because one of the things that drives me crazy is
I've done a bunch of recording, I got my numbers
and then I'm gonna make a change.
Is it better or is it worse?
What has gotten better?
What has gotten worse?
Like, is there a way to say compare?
- Yeah, that's something we are building a data log
on our backend side to be able to track your releases
and tell you where this is going faster,
this is going slower and which functions
or method are being the culprit of your slowness or whatever.
So yeah, that's definitely something I want to do.
- Yeah, that'd be so neat because you get into it,
you do maybe take a whole week or two and you sit down
and you make your code fast and you get it all polished.
And then over time, it kind of degrades, right?
As people add new stuff to it
and they don't really necessarily do so
thinking about performance.
So it'd be cool to like, okay, here's how it's degraded
and we can just focus our energy
in making this part better again.
I think that'd be great.
- Yeah.
- All right, well, tell us about your book.
I find it fascinating.
I kind of gave it a bit of an introduction,
the idea of scaling it,
but official title is "The Hacker's Guide to Scaling Python,"
and the subtitle is "Build Apps that Scale to Billions."
Billions of users, billions of requests,
billions of whatever, I guess,
but most apps don't do this,
so I think they would be,
A lot of people will be interested in hearing about it.
- Right, I mean, most apps don't do this,
but so many apps don't really need to do that.
So that's not a problem.
I wrote that book, I think four years ago now,
because I was working, like I said, on OpenStack,
where I would actually try to scale the things to billions,
where it would be running,
like it would be hops running on thousands of nodes.
- Right, and maybe any individual app
is not scaling to that level,
but you guys basically being the platform as a service,
in aggregate have a huge amount of load put on it, right?
- Exactly.
- Okay.
- And which at that point,
like when I started to write the book,
a lot of people were flying outside Python,
outside the Python realm,
because while Python is slow,
you can't do anything meaningful with Python, right?
So slow, you have to switch to go.
And that was the other thing.
- Yeah, that's the first thing you'd have to do,
is if I understand it.
Python is slow, so you have to switch to Go, right?
I hear it all the time.
- So I was confronted about that.
In the OpenStack project, somebody rewrote
one of the software of OpenStack in Go
because it was faster and was like,
no, the Python architecture you use is slow.
That's why the program is slow.
It's not being ready to Python
and there's no need to switch to Go.
It's not related to the language.
It's that the architecture was different.
So that's what kind of motivated me at the beginning
to write that book, to be able to share
everything I learned for the years before
building up on Stack, I mean part of it,
and learning on what works and doesn't work
at scale in Python, and to stop people switching
to Go for bad reasons. There are good reasons
to switch for Go for sure, but sometimes no.
- Exactly, not just because it's estuary.
Another example of this is people switching
to Node.js because it can handle more connections.
And the reason it can handle more connections
is because it's written in an asynchronous way,
a non-blocking way.
And so if you write blocking Python,
it doesn't matter if you write blocking C,
it's not going to take it as well
as if you write non-blocking Python.
And so things like AsyncIO and those types,
ASCII servers and whatnot can automatically
sort of put you back in the game compared to those systems.
The magic of, magic in quotes,
the magic of Node was they made you do that from the start.
They're like, oh, you can't call synchronous functions.
So the only way you do this is you write crazy callbacks
until better ways, like with promises and futures
and then async and await get into the language.
But they forced people to go down this pattern
that allowed for scale.
And then you can say, oh, look, our apps scale really well.
And it's just that I think a lot of times
people start with the easy way,
which makes a lot of sense in Python,
but that's not necessarily the scalable way.
So start one way, but as you identify these problems,
you know, maybe bring in some of the ideas of your book.
Right?
- Yeah, totally.
I mean, that's why like, one of the first thing
I like to say about that is like,
Python is not fast or slow.
First, it's like, you would say like English,
English is slow or English is fast.
Doesn't make any sense.
You have people, I mean, speaking English very fast
over notes.
It's like Python the long way.
When CPython is slow, okay, it's not the best VM
actually, I think it's far from being the best VM out there,
I mean, by VM, I mean, virtual machine of the language.
Like, if you look at the state of the art of, I don't know, V8 for JavaScript or
Or Grunt or whatever for Java or the JVM itself is pretty great nowadays.
And I mean, if you look at all of that, Python, I mean, CPython is already
looking bad, I think. But then it has over upside, which gives you a good,
I mean, good things when you use Python and a good reason to keep using Python and see Python in the end.
So
I think it's a trade-off and people are not always putting the right
weight at the right place for doing that trade-off.
Yeah, I agree. One trade-off might be, oh, you could write it in,
let's say Rust or something, for example, make it go faster.
But then you're giving up the ability for people to come with just a very partial understanding of Python itself
and still being really productive, right?
Like people don't come to Rust and Java
with very partial understandings of it
and be super productive.
They just don't, right?
You got to take in a big bite of that whole,
all the computer science ideas there,
whereas like Python can start so simple and clean.
And I think that's part of the magic.
But I guess some of the patterns of that simple world
don't always make sense, right?
I do like that you pointed out that not everyone
needs highly scalable apps.
Right? Because it's really cool to hear,
"Oh, they're doing this thing with Instagram."
Right? Like, "Instagram turned off the garbage collector."
And now they're getting better memory reuse
across their web workers.
And so maybe we should do that too.
It's like, "Well, hold on now.
How much of this infrastructure
can you afford just 20 more dollars
and not have to deal with this ever?"
Right? I mean, they run their own version of CPython.
that's a fork where they turn off the garbage collector.
Like, do you really need to go that far?
So I kind of put that out there just kind of a heads up
for people before they dive in.
Because kind of like design patterns,
like I feel like when you learn some of this stuff,
you're like, oh, let's just put all of this into place.
And then you can end up with a more complicated system that
didn't really need all those put in together at once.
And maybe like there's no app that actually incorporates
every single idea that you've mentioned here.
They're all good ideas in their context, but not necessarily...
You wouldn't order everything on a menu and put it all on one plate
and then try to eat it.
No. Especially because if you start...
For example, the first thing people do usually is,
you write a program. It's not fast enough.
Let's not say it's slow. It's not fast enough for you.
You're like, "Okay, I want to make it faster."
If you can parallelize things, you're like,
"Okay, I could run this and this in parallel."
You go, "Okay, I'm going to use threads.
All right, that's easy. There's a threading API,
there are the concurrence, future API in Python.
It's pretty easy to do,
but it adds so much complexity to your program,
you have to be sure it's really worth it.
Because you know you're entering the world of concurrency,
and when you're entering, you have to use locks.
You have to be sure about your program is not having side effects
between threads at the bad time or anything.
And it adds so much complexity, it's actually very hard
to make this kind of program right and to make sure it works.
And there are so many new edge cases you're adding
by adding concurrency, being threads or anything else.
But you have to be sure it's worth it.
And for a lot of people out there, it's really not worth it.
You could have a pretty simple application with just one process
or a couple of processes behind a Unicorn or a USB worker
and be fine forever.
But it doesn't make any sense to try to optimize.
And like I was saying, early optimization,
don't do it unless you are sure and you actually know why it's slow,
you know where to optimize, which might be a good user for profiler or not,
depending on what you're trying to optimize.
But make sure that you understand the trade-offs you are doing.
I saw so many people rushing into threads or anything like that
and writing code that is invalid and then could crash in production
because of race condition, etc., and they never thought about it.
and it takes months, years to get things right again
because it's very complex and writing
like multi-faceted code is not something humans do very well.
So if you can't afford to not do it, don't do it.
Well, I think, you know, going back to the earlier discussion with profiling and stuff,
either in production or just with C profiling,
measure first, right?
Because then you know so much better what can be applied to solve that problem
Because if the slow thing is you're waiting on the database,
well, you sure don't need more threads to worry about that, right?
You might consider caching.
That could be an option.
You might consider indexes to make the database faster.
But you could really easily introduce lots of complexity
into the system by applying the wrong fix
and not really get a whole lot better.
- Yeah. - So, yeah.
All right.
Let's talk about scaling.
I think scaling is just the definition of scaling
is really interesting because a lot of people see here
that like, I want an app that scales or like,
man, YouTube is so awesome.
It scales to a million requests a second or whatever.
I want that.
And then they have one, they have their app running
and they click the link and it takes three seconds
or they run the function and it takes three seconds.
Well, if that app scaled well, it would mean it could run in three seconds
for a hundred people as well as it could run in three seconds for one person.
That doesn't necessarily mean faster.
So there's this distinction I think people need to make
between high-performance fast code, quickly responding,
and then scaling like it doesn't degrade as it takes on more users.
Maybe you want to riff on that a little bit?
Yeah, there are two dimensions, basically, which is like we were saying.
One is more users, which is more in parallel, let's say.
And one is faster, like having the page being loaded faster.
So there are two different things.
If you want to really optimize one particular use case,
like page being loaded or whatever,
it's really a good practice.
I mean, you can't really scale that request,
a web request on multiple nodes,
unless it's very complicated,
but to load a page or REST API or anything like that.
you really want to profile that part of the code to be sure.
You don't have that--
That's a case where profiling locally with CProfile
might actually be really good.
One request is actually quite slow.
You could learn a lot about that, running that in a profiler,
and adding the horizontal scalability stuff
might actually make it a tiny bit slower for each individual request,
but allow many more of them to happen.
So you got to figure out what part you're working on.
Yeah, keeping in mind, if you see profile on your laptop,
it's going to be different than if you see profile on AWS
or anything you run, because your database is going to be different,
the latency is going to be different, so it's hard to reproduce
the same condition on your developer laptop
that you have in production, you don't have the same system.
So it's really a good way, and you can do 80% of the job,
but in some cases, it's great to have continuous profiling
on your production system.
And that gives you a good way to optimize your code
and to make sure that this dimension of being faster is covered.
Then the dimension of, well, let's scale to thousands of users
and still have the three-second load for everyone,
then that's another problem. That's where you actually don't need
a profiler, but you need a good architecture of your program
and your code, and be able to spawn new process,
new threads, new nodes, new anything that can process things
in parallel for you and decouple like split your program
in different parts and having a good architecture.
And there you can do that with Python
with any programming language, I mean, honestly,
but you can do it also that with Python version
to switch to any other language
if you know what you're doing.
- Right, it makes such an important difference there.
All right, so let's go, I thought it'd be fun
to go through a couple of the chapters of your book
and just talk about some of the big ideas there.
And the first, you kind of build your way up
to larger systems, right?
Like you started out,
we already talked about what is scaling,
but the next one that you really focused on is,
how do I scale to take full advantage
of my current computer?
The one I'm recording on here is my Mac mini M1.
It has four cores.
Over there, I have my sim racing setup.
It has 16 cores.
Let's suppose I'm running on that one.
If I run my Python code over there
and I create a bunch of threads
and it says a bunch of Python things,
there's a good chance it's using 1/16 of that CPU, right?
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
It's, I mean, people who start with Python,
usually it's that issue, I mean, pretty soon,
where you want to run multiple,
I mean, you want to run multiple threads in parallel,
for example, to make sure your code is faster,
and then, which is a proper way, I mean,
outside Python, it's a proper way to scale,
like running your threads,
allow you to run another execution thread
of your program in another CPU.
And Threads were not used that much 20 years ago
because all computers, every computer
had only one core, right?
I mean, your personal computer, it was a Pentium
with only one core and nobody cared about the Threads.
Now that everybody has 16 cores in their pockets,
it's like, "Whoa, we should do something about Threads."
So, yeah, that's where you started 10 years ago,
seeing more and more people being interested
in using Threads in Python because,
Well, I'm doing this computation, and I could do it twice to go faster,
so I'm spawning on new threads, and we got...
Except that if you do that in Python, it doesn't work very well,
because there's this global interpreter lock, the GIL,
which actually makes sure that your Python code works nice
on multiple threads, but every thread running Python code,
executing bytecode, they have to acquire this lock,
and L2 it forever until they're finished or until they get interrupted,
which means you can only have one thread in Python running at a time
on the Python VM and the other threads have to wait.
Or do other stuff which are not Python-related,
which is what a lot of C extensions like NumPy
or other C extensions you may be using are doing.
They're releasing the GIL and doing things which are not Python,
but still doing things that are useful for you.
But in that case, they're able to release the GIL
and let the rest of the Python program run.
But if your program is 100% Python,
don't use any kind of C extension,
not that you've got anything, then all
your threads have this giant bottleneck,
which is a gil,
which blocks every thread. So if you run...
I think my record is like
1.6 cores with a ton of threads
on the Python program. You can't really
use...
I never managed to use two cores with a
Python,
I mean a single Python program and a lot
of threads. It's very hard to get to that
two cores being used. So when you have a
3264 cores machine that you rent or that you use,
it's a pretty waste of resources.
Yeah. So this is super interesting.
And people often see this as like Python doing a threading restriction.
And what's really interesting is the GIL
is really about protecting the memory allocation and cleanup, right?
It's incrementing and decrementing that ref count.
So you don't have to take a lock every time you touch an object
or assign a variable, which would make it really slow.
It'd be more scalable, but it would be slower,
even in the single use case.
Yeah, there are many experiences to do that.
This is actually what you have in Java.
There are this kind of monitor, I think they call it,
where you have a lock per object,
and it works well for them, but don't ask me the details.
But for Python, there are a few experiments to do that,
and yeah, it makes the thing very, very slower, unfortunately.
so it's not a good option to do to go that road.
And I mean, there have been, if you look at the history of the Guild,
there has been a project called the Gilectomy a few years ago to remove the Guild.
I mean, there have been plenty of experiments to try to get rid of that.
And the other problem is that if we ever do that at some point,
it will break the language and a lot of assumptions around the language.
Because like in Python, when you add an item to a list,
it is thread safe by definition, because of the Guild for sure.
But if we start by saying, "Well, each time you want to
add an item to a list, you need to use a lock to do that."
Either we do it implicitly, but it's very slow,
or you do it explicitly as a programmer,
then it's going to be very tedious, for sure,
and it's not going to be compatible with the Python we know right now,
which is not a good option. So we are stuck.
Well, have you been tracking the work
on PEP 554 and multiple sub-interpreters
with what Eric Snow has been doing.
Yeah, a little bit.
Which, yeah, that offers some really interesting opportunities there.
Yeah, I think it's a different approach,
but it's a mix, like it's a trade-off between
multi-threading and multi-processing.
Yeah, it's like a blend, like a half and half of them, yeah.
But I think it's the most promising thing we have right now,
because I don't think the GIL is going to go away anytime soon,
unless somebody really take a giant project and do that.
But there's nobody, unfortunately, outside,
I mean, inside the Python community,
there's no company trying to sponsor any kind of effort like that.
A lot of the Python upstream stuff, from what I see,
are run by people willing to do that on their free time.
And some are sponsored, for sure, or hired by a company,
but a lot of them are not.
and there are nobody like a giant big tech company trying to push something like that forward.
So it's probably what's also not helping Python.
So it's the multi-interpreter thing is probably the next best thing we'll get.
I think it is as well because I just don't see the gig going away
unless we say we're going to give up reference counting.
And if you give up reference counting and then you add like a JIT and you get like,
I mean, that's a really different change.
And if you think of all the trouble just changing strings from Python 2 to Python 3,
- Yeah.
- Like this is the next level, right?
It's crazy.
- Okay, we're not finished yet.
I still have to maintain a lot of Python 2 code,
to be honest.
So I'm not ready to do Python 4 yet.
- I don't think we're ready for it either.
So I think subinterpreters is interesting
and subinterpreters are interesting because
they take the ways in which you sort of do multiprocessing,
which does work for scaling out, right?
You kind of do message passing
do message passing and each process owns its own data structures and stuff like that.
And it just says, well, you don't have to create processes to make that happen.
So it's faster, basically.
Yeah, and I think one of the problems with multiprocessing is also serializing the data
between the different process, which is always, I think Stack Overflow is filled with that.
People are complaining about unable to pick all the data between multiple processes, which
is very tedious.
I hope that having the subatom thing will solve part of that,
not having to serialize everything.
Also in terms of performance, in terms of usage for sure,
but also in terms of performance,
you don't have to serialize and serialize everything
every time you want to pass something to a subprocess
with a very huge serial.
- So in danger of not making it all the way
through the other topics, let me ask you,
just a couple of other real quick questions or comments
I'll let you call out a couple of things.
One, like this CPU scaling is a problem,
except for when it's not.
Like sometimes it's not a problem at all.
And the example I'm thinking of, if I'm writing an API,
if I'm writing a website, we need those things.
The way that you host those is you go to a server,
or you use a platform as a service, which does this for you,
and you run it in something like microWSGI
or gUnicorn or something.
And what those do immediately is they say,
"Well, we're not really going to run it in the main process.
The main process is going to look at the other ones,
I want to create four or eight or 10 copies of your app running
all at the same time and it will send the request off to these different processes.
And then all of a sudden, hey, if you have less than 10 cores,
you're scaling again.
- Yeah, exactly. So that's why threads are great for things like I/O,
but if you don't really want to scale for CPU and cores,
threads are not the right solution.
And it's way better to use multiple processes.
Either way, Unicorn, USB, very good solution for web apps.
Or there are alternatives to that.
Or a framework like Celery for doing tasks, for example,
which is out of the box to spawn multiple processes
to handle all of your tasks on multiple CPUs.
And usually, if you don't choose any kind of
E-Sync, IO-like framework, or Donado, or anything like that,
where you only have one process running one task at a time,
you can spawn multiple processes, even more processes than you have cores.
If you have 16 cores, you can start, I don't know, 100 processes
if you have enough memory, for sure.
But memory is really not a problem, unless you...
It depends on what you do, for sure. But for a REST API,
it's really not a big problem. You're not using gigabytes of memory per process
and better regress. So it's fine. It's winning a lot of Unicorn walkers.
Yeah, it depends on that for sure. So two things that I ran across that were
interested in this chapter that you covered were Futurist and Kotlin.
I'm not sure how you say that second one. Yeah.
Can you tell people about these two little helper library packages?
Yeah, Futurist is actually, it's a tiny wrapper around concurrency on the futures
that you might know in Python. The thing, it does a few things that are not there,
like the ability to have statistics about your pool of threads
or your pool of anything you use process,
which gives you a pretty good idea.
A lot of applications out there, they're like,
"Okay, I can scale on 32 threads, 64,"
and you have a setting usually to scale that,
and you don't really know as a user or even as a developer
how many threads you're supposed to start and to run
to handle your workload.
you're just typing a number randomly and see if it works or not.
And having statistics around that is pretty useful.
There are some features, if I remember correctly,
where you can actually control the backlog.
Usually, you have a pool of threads or processes
or a pool of anything trying to handle your task.
But the more you add, it can grow forever,
so I think the ability to control your backlog
and say, "Okay, I have enough tasks in the queue,
now you have to do something."
I'm not going to take any more tags.
So that's the pattern you see a lot in Q system.
Usually people when they design a Q system,
they design the Q system with like, there's a Q,
I'm going to take things out of it and process them.
And they don't think about controlling the size of the Q,
so the Q can grow forever, which in theory is great,
but in practice you don't have infinite resources
to store the Q and then to process it,
so you won't be able to reject works.
Exactly, and one of the big complaints or criticisms,
I guess I should say is in these async systems,
they don't provide back pressure.
A bunch of work comes into the front and it piles into asyncio,
which then piles just massively on top of the database,
and then the database dies.
And there's no place further back before the dying of the database
where it kind of slows down.
And so this is something that would allow you to do that
for threading and multiprocessing, right?
Yeah, exactly.
And which is one of the other chapters of the book,
which, well, that title is Design for Failure.
And you could write an entire book on that,
which is when you write your application,
usually you write something in a very optimistic way
because you are in a good mood and you're like,
everything's going to work, right?
And the reality is--
- Well, you test with small data and few clients, right?
- Exactly.
And the more you scale,
like the more you add threads,
the more you add processes,
the more you add nodes,
or your network, you're going to use Kubernetes
to spawn hundreds of nodes and versions of your application.
And the more likely it is to fail,
somebody's going to unplug a cable somewhere,
anything can happen for sure.
And you're not designing for that.
Usually you're designing in a very optimistic way
because most of the time it works.
And when it doesn't, if you really want to go at scale,
I mean, if you really want to go far
and you want to work even in extreme conditions
when the weather is really rainy, it's a lot of work.
So that's why I was saying at the beginning,
like it's a trade-off to add even threads
'cause then you have to, and what happens
when I can't start a new thread anymore
because I don't know my system is out of,
which is pretty rare nowadays.
You have a lot of space for threads usually,
but if you are on a, I mean,
very limited resource system or whatever,
like what do you want out of that?
- Threads pre-allocate a lot of memory,
like stack space and stuff.
- Yeah.
- Have you heard of Locus at locus.io?
Have you seen this thing?
- No, I don't think so.
- Yeah, so speaking of back pressure
and just knowing what your system can take,
this thing is super, super cool.
It's a Python load testing thing
that allows you to even do distributed load.
But what you do that's really interesting
is you create a class in Python
and you say you give it tasks
and then those tasks have URLs.
And then you can say, well,
this one I want 70% of the time,
the user's gonna go there
and then they're gonna go here.
And then I want you to kind of delay
to like, they click around,
maybe every 10 seconds or so, so randomly around that time,
have them click around.
And it's just a really good library for a tool for people
who are like, "Well, I didn't test it with enough users
because I'm just me."
But what does it actually...
Like something like this would be a really good option, I think.
- Yeah, that's a good...
Even to gather data for profiling after,
that's a pretty good...
If you're about to reproduce something...
- Oh, yeah.
- Yeah.
- That's interesting.
- Because you want to profile a realistic scenario.
So instead of hitting one person, you hit it with like 100
and then get the profiling results of that.
Okay, that's a good idea.
Yeah, that's really the good thing with continuous profiling
is that you're able to see for real what happens.
But if you know how to reproduce it, that's also a valuable option.
Yeah, okay, very interesting.
All right, so CPU scaling is interesting.
And then Python around 3.4.3.5 came out with this really interesting idea
of async.io and especially async.await
that makes AsyncIO so much better to work with.
And what's interesting is that has nothing to do with threading.
That doesn't suffer any of the problems of,
almost, the problems of the GIL and so on,
because it's all about waiting on things.
And when you're waiting, usually you release the GIL.
Yeah. So threads are a good solution for I/O
when you can't actually use something like AsyncIO,
because let's be honest, if you're using an old library
which was designed five years ago,
it's not designed to be a single also.
- Well, you're using an old ORM
and the old ORM doesn't have an async version of it.
And it's either rewrite it in a new one
or use the old non-async, right?
Something like that.
Then maybe threads, I don't know.
- Yeah, usually, I mean, ORM, it's a good bad example
in the sense that it's a good example technically,
but usually the problem is people writing bad queries.
- Yeah, I know.
Better queries than an index.
I'll probably solve that most of the time.
- Exactly.
But in theory, you're right.
Technically, it's a good example.
And yeah, it looks like it's in Kayo.
It's magic because like you were saying,
it's like the node thing that brought that back to life
where it has been used and there for the last 40 years.
I don't know.
And it's like suddenly everybody's like,
"Wow, that's amazing."
And that's how you would write anyway,
any web servers for the last 30 years.
But it's great.
Now it's built in in Python,
so it's pretty easy to use and it's very, very well.
I mean, I think it progressed a lot over the years.
Like a couple of years ago,
where everybody was using Flask or Django,
which is still true,
but there's a lot, a lot of better alternative
in the sense that like Starlette, et cetera,
but the first API that you can use to build an API website.
- Yeah, this whole Async.io world has really flourished
since you wrote the book, hasn't it?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, when I wrote the book,
I actually learned async.io writing the book and there was nothing.
The main problem is that I want to use Redis
or like you were saying, a database and there's nothing.
Or it's very low-level stuff and it's not going to be...
Yeah, I can use it but it's going to take me hours of work to get anything
close to what I would do with a synchronous version.
Nowadays, it's totally better. I actually do a lot of work with async.io myself.
I mean, everything's there for every
thing doing socket.io, file.io, everything is available. There are
sometimes multiple versions of the same library because
people don't agree on how to do Redis or whatever, which
gives you choice. So that's great and it's a very, very good way to
not use threads. So you still have the concurrency problem where you can have
multiple tasks from a single running, not at the same time in our space-time
dimension, but being static means pause, being resumed later,
so you have to still take care and you actually can use lock too
in SDKO, but it's still a little less of a problem and issue with threads,
and you're not going to use more than one CPU, for sure,
that's not designed to do that, but you will be able,
maybe more easily, because you will have less overhead
than with threads to be able to use 100% of your CPU,
like we were able to max out your CPU resource,
And then when you do that with one Python process,
well, just start a new one using Celery, Unicorn, whatever,
or Quotidien, you were mentioning, which is a good tool to do that,
which is actually able to spawn multiple processes
and manage them for you because usually that's the problem
when you have a demand, you want to do a lot of work.
Like the Celery model for Q is a pretty good example
when you have multiple workers and each worker is on thread
doing things in the background if you're not using a framework such as Celery.
And ContinuDone is a good small library to do that where you can
implement a class and have each class being
spun as a process, basically, and be managed by a master process
like you would do with UWSKI or Unicorn, and managing the child,
restarting them if they die, etc. So that's a lot of work to do. You can
totally do that yourself, but ContinuDone does that for you out of the box.
- Yeah, that's a cool way to create those sub processes
and stuff, but yeah, I think async.io is a lot of promise.
It's coming along, it's really been growing.
SQLAlchemy just released their 1.4 version,
which actually, so SQLAlchemy now just in like
a couple of weeks ago now supports a wait session query
of thing, not exactly that syntax,
but almost, they've slightly adjusted it, but pretty cool.
All right, and then one of the things that you talked about
of scaling that I agree on that is super important
is statelessness.
So if you wanna, and I suspect going from one to two
is harder than going from two to 10
in terms of scaling, right?
Soon as you're like, okay, this is gonna be in two places.
That means it has to be stateless and it's communication.
All right, all these things.
If you're just putting stuff in memory
and sharing the pointers and kind of storing
a persistent memory session for somebody,
well then putting that in two places
is really fraught.
Yeah, it's really the thing where
I like to say that if you start
using multiple processes, you're actually
pretty ready to handle multiple nodes
like over a network because
using multiple threads, you are always
in the same program, so it's tempting to
share the state of everything between
your different threads, and then you have
concurrency issues and you need to lock, etc.
But a lot of people go that road
being, I don't know, maybe
a bit naive and saying, "Oh, that's easy.
have to leave my program, but if you
are ready to go to the step where you
actually okay to split your work
into multiple processes,
which might have to communicate between
themselves for sure,
and they can start by communicating over
the same host,
but then you just add networks in
between the process and you can scale to
multiple
nodes and over whatever number of
nodes you want.
Then the problem is to handle
connectivity issue that you don't have
if you run on a single host, between processes,
you don't have somebody unplugging the invisible cable.
But if you're ready to handle all of that network failure,
which will happen for sure,
between your different processes,
then you can scale pretty easily on different nodes.
But as you were saying, it's like,
you have to switch your padding when you write your program,
which is being as stateless as possible.
Which is why I wrote a non-territorial chapter
on functional programming,
because I love functional programming.
I love lisp and and I would do lisp if it was more popular, but I have to do python
So i'll do python. It's great. It's a great lisp
But and and then for sure program gives you a pretty good way of writing code and give you a good mindset
I was I would say to write code but
Avoid to do side effects and then that makes your program stateless most of the time which make it very easy to scale
right the more statelessness you can have the easier it is going to scale and
you get it down to a point, well, maybe the state is now stored in a Redis server
that's shared between them or some, or even in a database, like a
a real common example is just put it in a database, right? So like on
the training site that I have, people come in, the only piece of state that is shared is
who is logged in. And when it comes back, it goes back
to the database, it's okay, well, who is this person actually?
Do they have a course? Can they access this course? Like all those things are asked every time. And my first
So my first impression of like writing code like that was like,
well, if I have to query the database for every request
to get back all the information about, you know,
whatever it is I care about for I'm tracking on this request,
it's going to be so slow, except for it's not really.
It works really well, actually.
And it definitely lets you scale better.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, it's pretty interesting.
Okay, so stateless programming,
which means like functional programming.
You want to just like call out that example
remove last item that you have on the screen here,
the first page of that book.
I think it will give people a sense of what you're talking about.
Yeah, exactly. I was trying to explain in that chapter
what's a pure and non-pure function, where you actually
have one function doing the side effect.
I mean, when you pass argument...
Functional programming, if you've never heard of it, is pretty simple.
Imagine that all your functions are black boxes,
and that you are going to put something in it,
and when you get something out, you can't reuse the thing that you put inside.
You're going to use only what's being with put.
So when you don't do a pure function and function programming,
you're going to pass a list, for example,
and you're going to modify it and not returning anything
because you actually modified the list that you passed as an argument,
which is not functional at all.
Maybe like list.sort would be an example, right?
The thing you're calling sort on is changing the list itself.
Yeah.
Yeah, which is, yeah, and that's a trade-off because list.sort is really faster than sorted,
putting sorted on the list, but it's not functional.
But if you call sorted or if you return the list minus the last item
for a function that removes the last item, then it's functional.
You're not returning the same list, you're writing a new list
with a different output, like the last item being removed,
but it is stateless, like you can lose the first, what you put as an input,
you don't care anymore, you have something that is outside.
And if you design all your program like that,
it's pretty easy to imagine having a large input of data,
putting that into a queue, having a worker taking that,
doing whatever we need to do, and then putting something
and putting that into a queue, database, whatever you might want to do.
And that's the basis of anything that scales,
is to be able to do that, to be able to scale
and do asynchronous tasks in the background.
Cool. Yeah, I think list.sort versus sorted of list is like the perfect comparison there.
Yeah.
All right. You touched on queues, and I think queues have this possibility to just allow
incredible scale, right? Instead of every request trying to answer the question or do the task
it's meant to do entirely, all it has to do is start a task and say, "Hey, that started. Off we
and put it into something like RabbitMQ or Celery,
RedisQ, something like that.
And some other thing that's gonna pull it out of there
and get to it when it gets done, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
It's really depends on what you do
and what you're trying to solve
with your application library, whatever.
But as a general thing, it's a pretty good way
and architecture of a program to have that.
Like if you, for example, a REST API,
which is what people do most of the time now.
I mean, you can definitely process a request right away.
And if you know that it's going to take,
I don't know, less than one second, okay, it's fine.
You can do that right away.
But if you know it's going to take 10 seconds, 20 seconds,
it's very, very impractical for a client
to keep a connection open for 30 seconds
for good and bad reasons.
- But almost anyone's gonna think it's broken.
Even if it technically would have worked.
it's been 10 seconds and there's something wrong.
This is not okay, right?
Like it's just not the right response.
- Yeah, and I mean, connection can be cut.
So if you need 20 seconds to do anything
and then it is being cut at 18 seconds,
then you lost your time and the client has to retry.
So it has to repost the same payload
and then you have to reprocess it for 20 seconds.
So you are actually losing time.
So it is way better to take the input,
store it in a queue, reply with 200, "Okay, I got the payload, I'm going to take care of it, and then I will
notify you with the webhook, I'm going to give you the result at this address," whatever mechanism you can use
to do asynchronous. But I mean, building this kind of system asynchronously, when you have the worker
taking a message from the queue, processing them, putting the result somewhere else, it's
it's already a really good way to scale your application.
And you can start without...
You can start with Python itself. There's a queue in Python.
There's multiprocess.
And you don't have to deploy it into whatever.
You can actually start if you know your program.
You can even just have a background thread and a list.
Yeah, exactly. You can start with something very simple for this pattern.
You don't have to use a huge framework or whatever.
If you know the pattern and you know it applies to what you're doing,
you actually can use it. And you know, for example,
that you will never need more than one host,
one node, one computer will be enough forever for your program,
while you don't need to deploy your network-based queue system
like Redis, Rabbit, or whatever. You can use Python itself,
use a multiprocess queue, and that will solve all your problems perfectly.
Yeah, that's a great example.
And the multiprocessing has an actual queue data structure
that it properly shares across with notifications
and everything across these multi-process processes,
where the multi-process thing can just
say, I'm going to block until I get something from the queue.
And then as soon as you put it in, it picks it up and goes.
But otherwise, it just chills in the background.
>>Yeah.
>>Yeah, very nice.
All right, moving on.
Designing for failure, that's a good one.
You know, the thing that comes to mind is,
at the extreme end of this.
When I talked about scalability,
I maybe said YouTube in a million requests a second.
This one is chaos monkey in Netflix.
- Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, you have to design for that.
So like I was saying, like a lot of people
that try to write their code with a very optimistic mindset,
like everything is going to be fine
and I don't really care about error or the exceptions
where you actually want to write proper exceptions,
like proper classes of exceptions
and proper handling of this exception in your program
and making sure that when you, for example,
when you use, I don't know, Redis
and use a Redis library, you want to be sure,
to be aware, and that's something
that's not very obvious, honestly,
'cause it's honestly not really well documented.
Like, you can read the API of a Redis library
and see, okay, it takes that type as an argument
and you're going to return that type,
but you don't know which exception is going to be raised.
So sometimes you have to see it with your own eyes
in production, like, oh, it's broken.
It's going to raise connection error.
Okay, now I know I need to fix it.
- Well, the tricky part of that is not necessarily
seeing the exception and knowing it, but now what?
Like when I get the connection error,
what means I can't talk to the database,
it's overloaded or it's rebooting 'cause it's patching,
but then what happens, right?
Like, how do I not just go, well, there was an error.
Tell the Datadog people there was an error.
so we know, and then crash for the user.
What do you do beyond that?
- Yeah, and the answer is not obvious.
It truly depends on what you're doing.
If you are in a REST API,
and your database connection is broken,
you can't connect to the database.
Are you going to retry?
How many times?
How many seconds are you going to retry?
Because the other guy is waiting
on the other side of the line.
So you can't do that for 10 seconds.
It's too long.
So you have to do that a few times.
Then what do you do?
Do you return a 500 error and crash?
Or do you return something that is like a retry later?
I mean, there's a lot of...
And you have to think about all of that.
Like when to say to the client to retry, if they can retry or just, yeah, crash.
That's also an option sometimes.
And there are so many patterns.
Most of the time, network errors, but it might be disk full or whatever.
And you have to...
So you can't think about everything at the beginning for sure.
you have to have a good report system.
- Are you a fan?
I totally agree about the reporting system.
It's hugely valuable and notifications as well.
'Cause if you don't look at the reporting system,
the log is full of errors and nobody would look for a week.
But are you a fan of the retry decorators?
You know, I'm talking about some of those things
you can say, here's like an expensional back off.
I like you to try five times and like first
after like a second and then five seconds,
then 10 seconds, what do you think?
I'm the author of Tenacity, which is one of the most widely used.
Yeah, that's one. That answers that question.
- You're a fan. - Exactly.
I am a fan, and it's all 80% of the problem.
I mean, it's up to you to know how to retry,
but it's a very, very good pattern to use,
and Tenacity provides that as a decorator,
which is not the best strategy if you want to have different strategies,
like this function should be retried this number of times,
depending on who the caller is.
But most of the time, it's good enough.
Actually, it's good enough.
Most of the time, it's better to use that
in a naive way where you just retry five times
for five seconds or whatever, but not doing anything.
Because if you know...
It's also not a silver bullet.
I see sometimes people using it to like,
"Well, if anything wrong happens, I'm just going to retry."
Which is not...
Like, please use proper exception types.
Like, catch the right thing and retry for the right reason,
Not for everything.
- Like maybe retry with connection timeout, but...
- Yes, but like if-
- Some other thing that crashes,
like authorization failure.
Like that's never gonna get better.
- Exactly.
But sometimes you see people writing,
you're like, "I'm going to retry exception.
Whatever is raised, I'm going to retry."
Which is really not a good idea,
'cause yeah, it's going to be fine for network errors,
but like you were saying,
if it's an authentication, you don't want to retry.
So, I mean, be careful in that,
But then if you know that you've got an I/O error most of the time
because the network is done one day,
it's fine to do that, and it's a really good way to design easily
for this kind of thing.
It doesn't solve everything, and if you have a large job, for example,
that you know is going to take 10 minutes to compute, etc.,
I mean, having this kind of free trial is going to save you
because in a framework like Celery, for example,
if your job fails after five minutes,
for whatever reason, it's just going to put it back in the queue
and retry later, but you lost the five first minutes that you used.
And you can end up in these poison message scenarios
where it tries, it fails, it goes back, it tries, it fails, it goes back,
it tries, and then, yeah, then it's not so great.
All right, just a little bit of time for some more.
Deployment.
You talk about, in your book, you talk about deploying on a platform
as a server, as a PaaS, like Heroku.
There's always VMs. These days we have Docker and Kubernetes.
I mean, honestly, it's not simple to know what to do as somebody who is a newcomer, I think.
Yeah, and I think it's a lot since I wrote the book, but nowadays, I still, I mean,
Heroku is still there and pretty widely used because it's a good solution.
The thing is that deploying a Python application, like for myself, I'm a pretty good Python programmer,
but then I was out of Python, like infrastructure and Kubernetes, I barely know anything about it.
It's a full-time job and it's not my job.
It's another side of another job.
So I could learn for sure, and I could be an expert in Kubernetes
and deployment of anything.
But I mean, it's fine to do that if you want to do that.
But as a Python developer, I don't really want to do it.
I'm happy to use any kind of platform,
the service like Heroku, where I can actually,
like using the Kubernetes container approach of deploying
and spending a lot of this to scale is not my responsibility,
but I can outsource it to somebody that knows how to do that.
So there's plenty of options. I think I wrote about Heroku, OpenShift,
it does that to Amazon or Microsoft or Google or other solutions.
Yeah, they might have something, yeah.
Yeah, and I mean, there's no reason if you really know
that your application is going to scale, you don't want to spend a lot of time
on infrastructure and learning, I mean, Kubernetes, Docker, whatever.
I mean, you can spin easily on a picture on top of,
of Heroku and then click a button to have two nodes,
three nodes, four nodes, 10 nodes,
and then wallet, and it's expensive,
but that's another issue.
- Yeah, the platform as a service often,
they exchange complete ease of use with maybe two things,
one with cost, and then the other is with flexibility,
right?
Like you kind of got to fit their way.
"Well, the way you use the database is our managed database service."
And if you don't like that, well, then, I don't know,
you got to just use our managed service.
You know what I mean?
Things like that are kind of somewhat fixed.
But I think it's really good for a lot of people.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, it covers 90% of the market, right?
I mean, most people that are going to start with,
even if it's not a bad project,
but like you're starting your company,
you're doing a small project,
and you know, maybe it's one day you will be the next Google you have to scale.
But at that time, you'll solve the problem.
You'll get plenty of money to solve it.
But until then, you don't have a lot of time,
you don't have a lot of money. It's actually pretty cheap
compared to the time you would spend learning
the ropes of Kubernetes.
I mean, a secure deployment
at scale of Kubernetes, I'm sure
it's pretty more complicated than writing
a simple Flask application.
So it's a trade-off.
I think it's a pretty good trade-off if you really want to
start saying, "Okay,
I think at some point I will need to scale.
I can't run on my laptop anymore, I need to run that somewhere.
While using a platform like that is a pretty good trade-off.
Yeah, and I think it's so easy to dream big and think,
"Oh, I'm going to have to scale. If I'm going to deploy this,
what is it going to be like if I get the first 100,000 users?"
You should be so lucky that you have that problem.
So often, things get built and they just stagnate,
or they don't go anywhere, or the reason they stagnate
is you're not adding features fast enough because you spent so much time
and building complicated architectures
for a case in the future,
when reality is on the past,
you could just pay 10 times as much for two weeks
and then completely move to something else
and you could buy yourself that time for $500, right?
But you could spend months building something, right?
Like that's going to support some insane future
that doesn't exist.
And so, you know, a lot of people,
they'd be better off to just move forward
and then evolve and realize it's not forever.
it's a path towards where you're going to be.
- Yeah, and then learn marketing
to have people coming to your project.
- That is the problem, yes.
- That might be my next book about doing marketing
to getting people on your project to be able to scale them.
- Yeah, I'll definitely read that book if you write it.
All right, we got some more topics to cover,
but we're down to just one
that I think we have a little time to touch on
because it's like magic sauce.
For database, the magic sauce is indexes.
For many other things, the magic sauce is caching, right?
If this thing is really slow,
I'll give you an example from Talk Python.
We have, or maybe even better from Python Bytes,
that's a more interesting example,
is that RSS feed for that thing is made up out of,
I think we had to limit it 'cause we got too many,
but for a while it was made up of 200 episodes.
Each episode is like five pages of markdown.
In order to render that RSS feed on demand,
I've got to render, I've got to go to the database,
query 200 things, and then mark downify them 200 times,
and then put that into an XML document and return that.
And that is not super fast, but you know what?
If I take that result I would have returned
and save it in the database
and just generate it once a minute, then it's fine.
Right?
Those, it's like magic.
It goes from one second to one millisecond,
and you just get so much scale from it.
- Yeah, that's exactly what you're saying.
Like it's a pretty good pattern when you have to optimize.
So that would be more for the performance dimension
when you want your code to be faster,
not necessarily to scale in number of user.
Even if at some time connected,
like if you have 200 people requesting at the same time,
your RSS feed and you have to do that
at the same time, 200 times, that's pretty useless.
So I mean, caching is pretty good pattern.
There's nothing actually very specific to Python there.
I mean, even in this chapter of the book, it's actually pretty like,
I'm talking about how to use memcache or already,
so whatever you want to cache,
and there are plenty of good solution to cache over the network.
You can start by caching locally in your own process.
Like, I remember I see.
Like a Python dictionary is a really good cache, right?
- For certain things. - Exactly.
And there are in Python 3 something that is the,
- there were the LRU cache. - Yeah.
- There are a lot of cache decorators. - Yeah.
Cache tools, the cache tools library in Python,
there's a lot of different algorithms if you want to cache locally
in your own Python program.
If you know you're going to call this method a hundred of times,
and the result is going to be the same,
just cache it if it's expensive to compute.
I mean, expensive to compute might be...
Well, expensive in terms of CPU, but it also might be expensive for database,
or sometimes the expansiveness is going to be the network,
you're going to request some data over the network,
and it's very far or it's a very slow system,
or very unreliable system.
So using caching system is a pretty good solution to avoid this,
which is also linked to the design for failure we talked about before.
Right, if you're consuming third-party services,
you can't necessarily depend on their uptime, on their reliability,
on their response time, all those types of things.
So when you go to our courses,
we've got 12 video servers throughout the world,
and we want to serve you the video
from the one closest to you.
So we have a service that we call
that takes your IP address, figures out where you are,
and then chooses a video server for you
so you get the best time.
That costs a little tiny bit of money each time,
but with enough requests, it would be, you know, hundreds,
maybe even, I don't know,
definitely into the hundreds per month of video.
of where is this person API charges.
And so we just cache that.
Like if this IP address is from this city
or this country, we just put that in our database.
And first we check the database,
do we know where this IP address is?
No, go to the service.
Otherwise, just get it from the database.
It's both faster and it literally doesn't cost as much.
It's less expensive in the most direct meaning of that.
Yeah.
And then you were hitting on the first
and biggest issue in computer science,
which is cache invalidation,
which is, well, in your case, the IP might not change of country.
It can change, not very often, but it can change.
Yeah, so for our, just for our example, what I did is it's in MongoDB, so I set up a
an index that will remove it from the database after six months.
Yeah, which is fine, but arbitrary, right?
Yes, it's totally, I could be wrong for a while.
I mean, exactly, but the failure case is it's slow streaming with buffering, potentially.
It's not complete failure, completely the wrong answer, right?
So for us, it's acceptable.
Exactly. So you made a trade-off, which is totally fine for your risk-based.
And that's a lot of things that you do when you want to scale is trade-off.
And sometimes you don't get things totally right, but it's fine.
It's just not the best experience for your user in your case,
but it's fine and you can live with it.
And I think it's a change of mindset when you go from,
"I'm writing a Python program which has to be perfect and works 100% of the time."
And then when you want to scale, you have to do a lot of trade-off.
or like, it will work fine for 80% of the people.
And for some cases, 5% of the time,
while that might be not optimal, but it's fine.
And that's a lot of doing things at scale
are changing this mindset to,
well, it works always, it's always true.
And sometimes it's not really true.
I mean, if you had a way for you to be aware
and notified that an IP address changed in this country,
you could invalidate your cache
and then make it totally reliable.
I mean, for a few seconds, maybe it won't be up to date,
but that would be close to perfection.
But you don't have that system, so you have to do what you did,
which is a good trade-off. It's pragmatic.
You have to be very pragmatic when you do things at scale.
Yeah, and also kind of designed for failure.
What's the worst case if that goes wrong?
It's like streaming halfway around the world or something.
Whereas other things, like if the database goes down,
you've got to deal with that entirely differently.
Yeah.
It's a hard one to fix though. I don't really know what to do there.
Well, I mean, caching, like you could cache, for example,
you could cache an older version and reply to the client,
like it might be an older version, I'm sorry, like what the time system is there.
I mean, depending on what you build, obviously, you have to know the use case
and the things you're going to do, but caching could be a solution.
That's a good idea because you might actually be able to say,
if I'm going to go to Redis, and if it's not there, then I'm going to go to database.
many of the requests that come in might never need to go to the database again.
If you say, "Oh, whoops, the database is down, we're just going to start with out of the cache,"
it could go for a while until there's some right operation.
As long as it's read-only, it might not matter.
Which is what services like Cloudflare does for the web, for example.
Like with caching, it protects you, and if you're down,
they're just going to show the page they had a few seconds ago until you're back up,
and nobody will notice.
You can apply that.
And the thing you have to keep in mind when you do caching
is to be able to invalidate your cache.
If you're caching database and something changes in the database,
you have to have this callback mechanism
where your database can say to your cache,
"By the way, that change, you need to update it."
You need to be aware of that,
otherwise you have to put arbitrary timestamp,
like you said, for your six months.
It's going to be six months and that's it,
which is fine for such a use case,
but for a lot of people who can like to RSS feed,
but wouldn't work very well probably
if you were doing six months.
- Yeah, that would be bad.
All of a sudden now there's 24 new episodes,
all of a sudden or something, yeah.
So this is where you write that cron job
that just restarts Redis once an hour and you'll be fine.
No, just kidding.
You're right, this cache validation really, really
is tricky because if you check the database,
then you're not really caching anymore.
You might as well not have the cache.
So yeah, it's super tricky, but definitely a bit of the magic sauce.
All right, I think that there's plenty more we could cover
in the book and about scaling and architecture,
and it would be really fun, but we're way over time,
so we should probably just wrap it up with a couple of questions here
that I always ask at the end of the show.
So, Julien, if you're going to write some Python code,
what editor do you use?
Emacs. I've been an Emacs user for the last 10 years.
I think I still have the commit access to Emacs itself.
- Oh cool, you did say you love Lisp
and you have your code powered by Lisp.
- Exactly, yeah.
I stopped but I wrote a lot of Lisp back 10 years ago.
- Yeah, cool.
The notable PyPI package, if you want you can shout out
Tenacity which we covered or something else if you'd like.
- Tenacity and DyeQuery which I love.
DyeQuery is a tiny wrapper around the logging system
The story is that I never remember how to configure the logging system in Python.
I do import logging and I don't know how to configure it
to work like I want. So Decory does that. It's pretty easy to use.
It has a functional approach like Tenacity in its design.
And it's basically two lines to use the logging system. You have something that works
out of the box with callovers, etc.
- Oh, fantastic. Yeah, I always forget how to set up the logging system and use something else
as well. I don't need to remember this. Fantastic. All right. So thank you for being here. Thank
you for talking about this and covering all these ideas. They're fascinating. And they
always require some trade-offs, right? Like it's when should I use this thing or that
thing? But if people want to get started, one, where do they find your book? Two, what
advice in general do you have for them going down this path?
I think, I mean, yeah, I mean, you can find my book,
scalingpython.com if you want to take a look.
It's a pretty good read, I think, to give you the right mindset
to understand what the trade-offs you might need to do in your program.
And I think that's what boils down to that,
like, what are you ready to change and how to design your program?
And what are you going to...
What is going to be your real use case?
Like, why do you want to scale?
And are you going to scale for real?
or are you just thinking that you will need to scale in the future?
And do the right trade-off and don't overcomplicate things
because you're just going to shoot yourself in the foot by doing that.
Yeah, it's super tricky. I would just add on to that.
If what you think you might need to scale in the future
is a web app or web API, use Locust to actually measure it.
And if what it is something more local,
like a data science type of thing or something computationally locally,
run C profile with it and just measure, right?
However you go about your measuring.
- Yep. - Yeah, fantastic.
All right, thank you, Julian.
It's been great to chat with you
and sharing these ideas.
Great book.
- Thank you, Michael.
- Yep.
Bye, and bye everyone out there in the live stream.
Thanks for being here.
[BLANK_AUDIO]